I wanted to move on to your next job.
I went into the advisory program, which was the
Military Assistance Command Vietnam, or MACV.
And it was the chance to move away from American
units
into an American compound But you went out and
worked counterparts. You had a Vietnamese across
the desk from you, the job assignment. You were the
advisor to them. And I think that's one of the
problems some of our higher level commanders had.
You did not run the Vietnamese army. You merely
provided advice they could accept or reject. One
of the problems was you had to prove to them
Which, once again, took up time until you get to the
point they're happy that you're trustworthy. You
know, every month, every six months, or every
year, in walks a new American to do this job. And as
one of them remarked was, when asked, why don't you
guys press the war harder? You can fight hard as you
want. You're here for a year. I'm here for the rest
of my life. Yeah. You know, I've got my fixed amount
of time unless I do something unusual to stay
there. I do my job, I arrive, I learn my job, I
perform my job, I get nervous about leaving and I
leave. The next American walks in, usually with
about a three-day overlap from you to me, and says,
hi, I'm your replacement. He says, I'm so glad to
see you here. I thought they might want to keep me.
And you take him over and you introduce him to his
counterpart, your best friend after a year at
least, a trustee. And who are you? I'm the new
American here. What's going on? And he spends the
next 30, 60, 90 days trying to find out where North
is. So we had a problem. They had a problem. There
was also the question, I guess looking at it, that
whether the best went to the advisory program or
whatever. The emphasis was big unit battles. Big
unit battles didn't win the war. The question may
have been and always remain that one, The war was
probably lost in the hamlets, the villages. This
is where the advisor lived and died. He lived in the
mud outpost. You ate with him. You wore the same
armament or lack of armament they wore. You didn't
wear, with the Vietnamese army, you didn't wear
American flag vests and steel helmets when you
went on patrol. You wore your shirt open to the
sleeve, you know, sleeves up like theirs, lightly
armed. They wore tennis shoes. You wore your
boots. You carried your chopsticks in your
pocket. What we tried to do, and I think it was the
part that was successful in Vietnam,
first you had to prove you were there to stay, which
was a difficult thing to do, particularly when you
left every year. Beyond the individual leaving,
we had to say, if you trust us, you risk your life. My
advice is this is how we fight the war. That's not
what the problem is. Don't you understand? And you
would hang on to what the problem was. And this was
going on forever. The time you learned your job,
you were through. It was time to go. In other words,
they tell one of the things in Vietnam, the first 30
days, you got killed because you were stupid. The
next 10 months, you did your job. The last 30 days,
you got killed because you were too cautious. You
were worried about dying. I'm short. I'm real
short. You counted days. When days got too small,
you switched to hours, then jumped to minutes. And
everybody that ever went could tell you how long
they were there. It's just one of these. And
depending on where you were, some units had the
short timer stick, others no different symbol.
But everybody marked or counted and you knew about
where you were. And I say that it's a relative, how
close am I? You weren't safe in Vietnam until you
were out of there. That's the only safe, that was
the only way you knew you lived over Vietnam was
you're over international water and you're on
your way home. Till then, than you think of Gary?
You were fair game.
I think the hardest thing we had to do and learn was
we were guests of their government. And as guests,
you had to learn to conduct yourself with certain
actions that you might not have done had it been
your home versus their home. If the Vietnamese
said, we don't want to go on the operation until 10
o'clock in the morning, you wait until 10 o'clock,
even though you knew by 10 o'clock everything's
over. So you worked on the next three weeks, four
weeks, a month, trying to get them to say, look,
let's do this differently. Maybe try this, but you
had to make their commander believe he thought of
it. If you walked up to me, and I'm the American, and
you're the Vietnamese, and I said, do it, He may do
it because he knows your radio calls for the
helicopter in case he's wounded. But he doesn't
have any authority left in front of his men. So you
make him believe he discovered this thought in the
middle of the night on his own. And he runs out the
next morning and does what you whispered in his
ear. And you can't stand up and holler, well, hot
dogs, he did it. I told him and he did it. You just
stand there. And when you get away from each other,
away from them back in your own compound or with
your other crew, we got it. Now let's hope it works.
And they had to see it in their system. And what we
did to their system that hurt was we copied it after
ours. In other words, we decided instead of us
learning their way, they'll learn our way. So we
made the Vietnamese military... a replica or a
model of the American Army with all its great
logistical support, which they didn't have. And
then you wonder, I wonder why they can't do that.
And you face that problem. You know, we, at least on
a large scale with the advisors, we had at one time
there about 20,000 at the top levels. top number of
advisors in South Vietnam, had them assigned to
all the provinces. We had within the advisory
program a thing called a MAT team, a mobile
advisory team, which roamed around.
vagabonds as far as where they live. They went from
job to job to job. The unit I was on was a province
team. We had a fixed responsibility just like a
state or a county line. We worked in a particular
place with the forces that were there, but we would
have mobile teams come through the area, do
specific problem-solving for us, do operations.
After we were successful, the Vietnamese took
over. This unit went on somewhere else and worked
for the next Vietnamese unit. Americans were with
you in the province? We had 100 assigned at the
team. 100 officers and men. Total men. In your
team? In the intelligence business, we had four at
province level. We would have... one or two,
normally an officer and a sergeant, and each one of
the subsectors are districts. So what you really
had in the intelligence business was about, in our
province with Benoit, we had six districts, so you
probably had at best 13, 14 people, which did not
work for you. Now listen carefully to this one. I'm
on the province team But the other Americans are
advisors to the Vietnamese at each level of their
operation. I had no team. I had myself, my American
NCO.
I was the advisor to the Vietnamese intelligence
officer at the province.
I could advise him all I wanted. If he didn't want to
take it, you couldn't make him. They went through
the game, by the way. They were very good at
learning what we were good at watching. They
always wanted more typewriters, pens, pencils,
chairs, goodies, because it was a status symbol.
How many things... Let's talk about, let's you and
I go to the woods and collect intelligence. Kind of
exciting. A lot of them didn't want to go to the
woods. You live longer not going to the woods.
But... what we had and the hardest thing to learn
and our commanders and i say the commanders the the
province senior advisor are actually the ones we
worried about the province senior advisor was a
civilian the deputy was the military and always
used the term the it was deputy but we just called
him the boss because he was the colonel and i'm not
sure that they ever really
got out at the end, understood what happened or
didn't happen in the field. If you had reports to do
that said an area was safer and we had a thing called
the Hess Report Hamilton Evaluation System. One
month you raise one village, you lower the other
one. Nobody spent the night out there. The village
chief didn't even spend the night out there. But on
paper, we pacified the area. In real life, go on out
there, but be sure you're back before 5 o'clock or
don't worry about being back. Don't wait on
sundown. Don't plan on eating supper and
strolling down the street at midnight in these
villages, not unless you took a lot of guns with
you. And we played this paper chase game. It all
looked good on paper. But the problem was that's
where the war, that's where the fighting was being
done that we were doing was on paper. And that left
some problem areas and some things there.
What did a typical operation in this capacity
consist of? Well, what you had, your normal, if you
were at province headquarters, You were
responsible, much like the order of battle
section for the intelligence picture in the
province. Except this time, instead of having
American troops who collected the data, you had
Vietnamese, the national police, their army. We
had a thing at the province level called the PRU's
Province Recon Unit, which worked directly for
the province chief who were trained and directed
by us. In other words, you had 50 guys, you'd train,
equip, You got them M16s, legally or otherwise,
American uniforms, boots, ammunition. You
trained them as a private mercenary reaction
force to do what you wanted done. When the
intelligence came in, you had somebody to go. The
district chiefs is where the actual collection
went on. The National Police had a thing called the
National Police Field Force. We had an alphabet
organization of collectors there. census
grievance, we had people under all kinds of names
and covers out in the woods, out in the villages,
trying to collect data about the other side. What
our normal job there was was to convince the
Vietnamese, okay, we've got enough, or they would
come to you and said, we want an operation. Our job
then was to make sure we got the helicopters, we got
the assets they needed to get them out there. Or, in
some cases, they would come to us have a lot of data,
but they couldn't do it because so-and-so was kin
to somebody. The old power game. The
brother-in-law of the relative of. And at this
time, sometimes our side of the organization
might mount an operation. Just go bag him. We know
who it is. And after you bring him in, let them
explain how he got there. He doesn't know how he got
there. Hi, who are you? Let's go. Midnight Hook.
We'll go get them. Those were less rare. What you
normally had was you would go out with the
Vietnamese unit, go in a village, you walk through
the same village every day. The day you walk in and
grab whoever you're after. You may have a team set
in the jungle and watch them for three or four
months and then grab them. It's just, it was what
level of proof do you want somebody to work for the
other side? Do you want three reports from the
laundry woman that so-and-so is a communist? Do
you want him in a meeting with a communist? It was
how much proof and what level do you go get him? Do
you want him carrying a gun? Depending on what it
was, you'd go out and try to round them up. And it
depended on if the district chief wanted to make
himself look good to the province chief, he ran and
got one. He also may have saved one so when things
got rough and tough, he had a spare. You see, they
were there forever, too, and they were appointed
by the province chief. The district chiefs owed
their job to the province chief, who owed his job to
the military command. So it was one gigantic
bureaucratic thing. You scratch my back, and I'll
scratch yours. You knife me, and I'll stab you. And
you had to learn to work your way through it. What
pleased one boss might not please the other, and be
careful. So you worked with Arvin and the National
Guard? We worked, the level we worked with, we
didn't work with the Arvins at all. The province
commander had some. We worked with what would be
the National Guard units, the regional police,
The RFPF, the Regional Forced Popular Force. This
was where the war was won or lost, the village
troops. The two squads in the village, you had to
learn, and finally when you were good, you went out
around the villages and you stayed in different
places at different times. Not because you wanted
to, but because you wanted them to see you out
there. Here's the American. He's out here to show
you you can do it, you can catch them. And you'd go
out and conduct raids for them. We also lived
normally at the district headquarters. The MAT
teams lived in the villages. We had the ones that
went out.
Normally you lived in the village in one location
inside of this unless something happened and you
had to move.
Can you sort of describe a typical operation in the
field, something that you went on, some unique one
that stands out in your mind? I guess one that would
be, I won't say unique, but it stands out as one of
the different ones, is we went out, we had an
intelligence problem with one of our units that no
matter what we did, the other side seemed to either
know we were coming, they could either stand and
fight, and what bothered us was you would go out
with the Vietnamese, take the hill when you got to
the top, the little old ladies are waiting up there
with beer and Coca-Cola iced down to sell it to you.
They could have been waiting there to kill you.
Someone was telling them, you know, they're
coming. They're going to be here at 10 o'clock or 8
o'clock or whatever time. The one funny one that
happened on that run, we went out. We normally did
not have aircraft at this level. In other words,
you didn't own any planes. You had to call ahead for
a month and say on the 10th of next month, I want five
helicopters, ten helicopters for an operation.
You might or might not get them. We went on one that
when we went out, we turned into a rice paddy. Just
when they went in on final approach to flare, we saw
sunlight reflecting off the water, but it was
supposed to be a dry jump. Everybody had a heavy
load. So you jump in a rice paddy full of water. It's
memorable. Bend one leg behind you. Bend one leg
however you want to bend it. Stick one foot in the
mud and hope your head's above the water when you
stand up. And then you walk back. You see, we would
ride out. The aircraft threw us off. They left. You
walk home. Security on the way home from an
operation like that was fun. They bunched up. They
all climbed in a couple of dump trucks and ride back
to the compound. No security as we'd know it. But
they said, don't worry, communist not here. We go
home, eat lunch.
And we finally found the village, the district
chief found his security problems on the
Vietnamese staff. And he plugged the problem.
But we had rules about that, and we were ordered out
of the compound when he had anything he had to do.
Since you were advisors, you had to go. If he said,
you leave now, you go. I'll call you when I want you
back, then call you back. So you were guests. Don't
forget it. Sometimes we were pushy guests,
sometimes not pushy enough, but you're still
guests.
There's probably at the village level no typical
thing. It's just like going to the office to work
and you decide four times this week to go out on a
two-mile sweep around your town, around your
village. Take about 50 people, pick up and go. Nine
out of ten times, you see nothing. One time you have
a report that the communists are out there You hope
you're right because you've been wanting them.
You get out there at the same time and your
intelligence is better than theirs and you catch a
few. Or they decide to come to town to demonstrate
to the villagers you can't even protect the
village and they attack your compound. You got
some of these. We used to laugh and say both our
compounds were in mortar range of each other one
time. They lived in the woods about two miles from
us and they were generally out there. But by the
time you could walk out there to get them, they were
gone. You could find food on the table, still warm.
But how do you sneak out there and catch them? Their
spies were as good as... And they'd come to town and
collect taxes right there. The next morning you go
downtown, whoever was there said they were in here
last night, they wanted rice. Well, that's what
they usually wanted. They wanted money. They
wanted something. They may want a few recruits.
Everybody knew somebody in the other side. May
even have a relative on the other side. So what we
had to do, and the hard thing was, convince them to
get him to quit being on the other side. Those are
the difficult things to try to get done. So you
mostly, these regional force, popular forces,
mostly engaged They engaged one, two, three,
four, five VC trying to sneak in a village. Little
things. The war is not written about. There were no
thousand man battles. It was your six men, your ten
men, your twenty men, kill their twenty men or
wound them. A big firefight, you shoot all night
and the next morning you got one blood trail or you
got nothing. What did you see? I don't know. You
never saw a thing. were fights from villages when
we got in the way of their infiltration routes
that's where we put these mobile teams tried to
find where they were sneaking through the woods
put a mobile team right there in the middle of it
with 25 30 guys block them uh they'd change routes
if possible we gradually did a lot of things called
rome plows we crushed down, bulldozed out
thousands and thousands and thousands of trees
per mile, cleared fields of fire. But you could, no
matter what you did equipment-wise, until you
convinced the villager it was their war, get off
the fence, you weren't going to do anything. At
least where I looked at and was, I think we could
have won the war in the villages. I think locally we
held it quite well for quite a while. But we didn't
commit our assets as a country to that. We were out
fighting the big war, which wasn't the real war at
all. The real war was in each village because South
Vietnam is not a country, was not a country. About
the only thing everybody could tell you who was was
Ho Chi Minh. They could tell you, they could point
to Hanoi. You say point to Saigon, it's like
turning off the magnet, point on a compass, and
just letting it freewheel. There wasn't any.
Loyalty in Vietnam was family, in Hamlet. We never
did quite grasp that at the high level. I think the
people at the bottom in the advisory program, a lot
of them saw that. It's selling it to the people at
the top. That's the hard part. Were you ever
involved in anything like the Phoenix Project? I
worked in Phoenix in and out for the 18 months that I
was in the advisory program. Normally in Phoenix
you ran, these were the people that ran the
province intelligence centers, the PEOC was the
province, DIOC was district. You would have that
job as an additional job. You were assigned to the
team and your job was an intelligence specialist.
You also drew jobs that you did not tell your boss
you were conducting. If they wanted to know why you
were gone for three days, you just ate the cake. You
couldn't say, sir, I was doing something. It was
just, I thought I had something to do in the woods,
and we sat there and waited on somebody to come, and
we waited, and we waited, and we waited, and nobody
came, no matter if you were there or not. But...
That was an extremely killer spot. Well, yeah, the
whole thing is, And the whole thing really, a
simple sentence about it would be, Phoenix was
designed to neutralize the shadow government.
And I think the records show we probably
neutralized about 17,000 of them, 18,000.
Phoenix also may have gotten out of hand. Like
anything you can't see, how do you regulate it?
The bosses never said kill. It was always
neutralized. Ours, they use the other term,
rendered militarily ineffective. That's 30% of
the targets destroyed. Your head counted for 10,
your arms counted for 10. That's one head, both
arms, that's 30%.
Don't reduce a lot of things to writing. These were
done face-to-face. Go do orders. Come back, tell
me yes or no. End of End of question. So you didn't
have... Your direct superior wasn't involved? My
superior, in many cases, never knew what
Phoenix... He knew there was a Phoenix team. We had
reports we did. We ran the stick, the pen, and the
map for him. When I conducted operations outside
the gate and everybody took their turn conducting
them, I may be going to tell him, I'm going out and
ambush the trail tonight. If it looks promising, I
may stay on for tomorrow. Well, you go out there,
you sit down, you let everybody know you're there,
then you get up and sneak off in the dark. Go do your
Phoenix job. It may take you two days. You come back
three days from now, and he says, why in the heck
didn't you answer your radio? I was busy. We were
sitting there watching an ambush. I said, what
happened? Nothing. He gives you the big weenie
over it, too. A lot of Phoenix officers got fired,
bad efficiency reports. It was a matter you had to
decide early in that project, and the company
wasn't going to write you a good report saying you
worked for them. It was just the Army paid us. We
worked for the Central Intelligence Agency.
either one or two levels of military bosses above
us, but the ultimate guy in each province was some
kind of an agent, whoever the company sent over
there, Mr. Smith and Mr. Jones. Did you receive any
special training from them? Not particularly.
Everybody that basically got in there wanted in.
They didn't draft a lot of reluctant people.
Should like to do something exciting, really
wonderful, you know. Did they approach you about
it? Well, it's kind of like some of your friends
that are in said, gosh, we got something you ought
to like. It's kind of recruitment from within. The
people within that know you or knew you, somebody
knew you said, hey, I understand he's down here.
Can we find something? And if they offered you
something that's more exciting than sitting at a
desk or going out and Counting troops.
You're not going to stand up and get your parade,
but you can go out and do something. Let's go what
we're waiting on. And this was one of the things
that I think made it interesting. There was some
danger in it, sure.
But a lot of excitement in it. How did they know how
you were going to react in that situation?
You never knew that, but I mean, it's just saying
that, well, you've done your other job somewhere
else. You've been in the woods. We believe that,
and they were always short people. In fact, one of
the problems they had was nobody wanted to go to the
advisory half. A lot of it was hard to get people
over there, hard to keep them. And if there was a guy
or two that came along that wanted to go do
something a little off the wall, well, leave them
alone.
As long as they got done what they wanted done, they
really didn't care what you did the other 30
minutes using the woods. You did their job in 30 and
you took an hour to come back at your business. You
went sightseeing for 30 minutes. Don't be stupid.
But it was a trade. Somebody said, we think that.
Then don't mess up because you put your name on it
too. You vouch for me. I go out there and I'm the
clown klutz. then you get a problem.
But it was a different challenge. It was something
that I think was approached and sold somewhat, a
friend, you can make a difference. And I think most
of the guys that got it believed it, at least at the
start. And I think one of the problems with any
program of the type is you can't come out and
explain how you're doing it. and by not explaining
it the commander said you intel types can't find
you know where with both hands holding on to it you
can't find it look in the mirror you know and and you
bagged it there was some notoriety and there were
some some guys that really caused problems in the
program but uh the program i think to a large extent
worked it's the problem with any of those
operations of that type how do you measure success
Everybody remembers the one failure. You know,
you go out and you miss the target. You go out and bag
the guy. You can't have a parade down Fifth Avenue
for you. You got him. Only satisfaction you get was
you know you got him. You and the other three guys in
the woods, the four guys, the five guys. And you may
not know you got him. The boat comes by, you shoot
everybody in the boat because the guy's supposed
to be in the boat, and you come home. You go back to
the team house, think we got him. You have to wait
until the other side, maybe a year later, two years
later, three years later. You capture a document
that says, two years ago at 2 a.m. in the morning, we
lost these three guys who were shot out of the boat,
and they name them. By then, you've rotated home.
Somebody may tell you one day that was in the
business later than you were, come by and say, hey,
by the way, you did get him. It's not like the
infantry commander. You get the other side, you
walk out, and you have your picture made there with
8,000 of them stacked up. We didn't want them
stacked up. I just went and got one. Did you, these
three and four-man, five-man teams, were they
Vietnamese joint? No. We normally ran, when
Phoenix worked, it ran all U.S. personnel. other
words i want you to go somewhere and do something
you may have had a vietnamese security force that
stayed somewhere with one of the americans the
other four you detached yourselves took off went
and did what you were going to do and come back
normally do not work joint operations in fact most
of the ones we worked weren't joint because we were
doing something they weren't going to do or
couldn't do or somebody might said wouldn't do but
it was Did you have any type of... I guess you had to
be
completely... had no identifying... Well, you
didn't sign your name Kilroy was here. You
tried to make sure you left as few clues as possible
in the woods. You were tidy. Don't go out there and
play cards and eat lunch. If you ate, you ate their
food. I mean, you know, most of the stuff that I got
in on that way were go out, wait on something, do
something, come back.
Where possible, you tried to disguise it as a
communist act. And there were ways of doing that.
But give the other side credit for doing
something. They did it. And if it turned out they
did it and it was one of their own, well, I guess he
was disloyal. Let them get the
credit.
Did you feel like that the Phoenix project
accomplished the objectives that you were out to?
The only part any of us had there then was your local
picture. In other words, you got province-wide,
corps-wide over briefings.
If you asked to, I think it accomplished an
objective. We removed enemy agents,
plugged leaks. tried to disrupt the shadow
government it wasn't complete you couldn't find
all of them there's a lot of people i would like to
have met at least once uh i think at the the level we
were working at we at least kept their government
from growing it was kind of the uh well it's like
fighting fire ants You kill a mound, and another
mound shows up, and you go after it, and another
mound shows up, and you dose the next mound. I think
we held them in check. The Vietnamese had to be the
ones who decided. They now felt successful
enough, brave enough, bold enough then to then
mount the operation and go get them. And we got a lot
of that where I was. Because we helped equip them.
In other words, Americans helped the Vietnamese.
We got them equipment. We got them boots. We got
them our rifles. We made them look like us. In other
words, instead of having 25 rifles, you had one.
But you had to make them come around. It was their
war, not yours. You were merely there as the
advisor. Then you can say, yes, we won. When the
district started doing what it should have been
doing by our guess of what a war ought to be, we were
then happy, yeah, we're succeeding here. You had
those. You had the failures. But on hold, I think
where we were, we succeeded.
After I left, I was told they brought American
units in and cleared an area that we didn't have the
manpower to clear or the equipment. But I'm saying
it was an area that we knew was a problem area that
what it amounted to was if you had a 30,000-acre
preserve you can cross and nobody can see through,
there's nothing we can do about it. So we came in and
bowdozed it out clean. Once it was clear, you can
look out there for three miles, four miles,
nothing going on. But that's where the heavy
equipment the Americans had would come in. The
village areas, I think we helped the villagers
there to help themselves. I think that part was
successful. I think Phoenix
was fairly successful even though I'm not sure in
the end how you measure success. I don't think you
do it in number of targets neutralized. I think it
may be measured the best way in was what did the
Vietnamese government, their people feel that
they were doing. Ours became, our advisees became
more capable of doing their own war. I think that's
a success measure. I think the villages we were in
became proficient. What we did was give them that
gentle nudge and once in a while show off when you
had to, but you did not want to go out and do these
things because if you were ever caught doing them,
you're through. The unwritten rules of the thing
are coming apart. The adequate breach of... They
didn't realize you had absolutely no trust in them
to slip out there and do this. Oh, you didn't
want... We never told the Vietnamese. Oh, the
Vietnamese never knew who did it. No. You see, when
the Americans performed as Americans, that's
what it was. Just the job was done.
Another case of communist terrorist. Maybe his
bomb went off before he got the planet. You didn't
hang a sign on anybody's desk saying, we did it. Let
them sort it out. They may know, but they were more
polite than walk up and say, did you Americans that
were missing from the compound for two days go and
do something? Because your boss is already
hollering at you in front of all of them about why
didn't you answer what was going on. Well, boss, we
were sitting in the woods looking at something. We
thought it was nice. And while you guys are in the
woods on vacation sitting on your butts, we're
back here overworked and undermanned. Yeah, I
guess that's how it is. And you ate it. Did that have
a negative effect on you? Oh, yeah. It had a
negative effect on you. On your record, too? Yeah.
If you didn't want it cleaned or couldn't get it
cleaned, how are you going to clean it? The guy that
sent you to do something didn't put it in writing.
He wasn't going to write you a report card and say
thank you. Your thanks was you got to do it.
And that was the problem with part of it. You can't
stand up and have the parade because then you've
lost the effectiveness. But if you don't have the
other proof... your boss says how come didn't you
perform as well as i hoped you just stand there and
say well gosh boss i guess i'm not what you expected
and yeah it was uh it had some negative performance
it's how to get kicked and stand there uh you
mentioned a while ago that uh
Sometimes the program was taken advantage of. In
what way? Well, if you were out doing something,
nobody
was really going to ask you what else might you be
doing.
If I went in and I bagged whoever I went after, I
picked up whatever I was sent to do. If on the way out
you picked up some spare change in your own pocket,
there wasn't anybody left that was going to say he
took it there were people in there that they took
advantage of it but eventually it leaks because
you're no longer conducting yourself as if you've
got money you've got something and usually it came
out very quickly particularly when you're
talking about five guys that supposedly haven't
been anywhere living in the woods all of a sudden
act like they're uptown that uh Most of it, a lot of
it, some of them took advantage of the time. They
simply went out to do a job that wasn't going to get
done. Instead of doing it one day and coming back,
you stayed a week. What are you going to do to them?
Fire them? You're just out there doing a job. You
weren't watched when you did these things. In
Vietnam, the advisors weren't watched all the
time unless you want to call the Vietnamese seeing
you drive around being watched. You have your
jeep. Where is it going? Gosh, I don't know. How
long is he going to be gone? I haven't got any idea.
When's he coming back when you see him next? And
that was the most of the goof off. There were a few
that did other things, but I'm saying that was the
big one. Some got caught picking up property that
wasn't theirs. Dumb.
It's been said that
the project was used as a way for... uh people to get
revenge on one another oh if the vietnamese wanted
you dead it was simple
supply the information to the system the
vietnamese at the province level had a committee
that met they made the selections on the
system-wide ones as the Who should Phoenix go
after next? Took a vote on it. They supposedly had
hard evidence. In other words, they had agent
reports, sworn statements, police sightings
that you are a commie. If they didn't like you, just
have that same policeman who's your
brother-in-law swear that you're no good. The
system will then go get you. And there was
problems. Their standards of conduct might not
have been what we wanted. But you had no way of
knowing because you weren't asked when you were
assigned a task why it's been assigned. You were
told the committee has voted to proceed with the
operation. If you didn't want to proceed with the
operation, resign. Do
you think there was instances where the Viet Cong
or Vietnamese whoever fed you with false
information so that you would select the target
that they wanted neutralized I'm sure without
saying I have any proof I don't have any because you
never saw when you worked in the field the answer to
that question it's always possible whether it's
probable
you know I don't probably have somewhere had no no
proof and no idea of it. Was there, what were the
prevalent operational problems that you
encountered? I mean, I'll give you an example of
what I'm after. You may have not noticed it so much
when you were with MACB, but perhaps more when you
were, but such things as
the morale problems or drug problems or language
problems? I think the biggest problems that way in
67, if you want to go back to that one, pick up
I-Corps with American units, there wasn't a drug
problem as such in the field. The troops in the
field were fairly straight. Anybody that was fool
enough to shoot up out there probably came home in a
body bag. You just sat there when the firefight
started and anything that was standing up went
down. The drug problem was probably in the base
camps. Too many hours of sitting on your butt doing
nothing but sitting on your butt. And when you got
off work, nowhere to go and nothing to do. And
particularly, I think, the longer it went toward
the end of the war, and I will say that is reading
reports and speculation afterwards was, I think,
probably the worst guy. When it became apparent
you weren't going to win and let's get out, then I
think the problem was who wants to be the last guy to
die in Vietnam became relevant. Not me, sir. Where
I worked, and remember, when you're talking about
the intelligence people, you're talking about
the hand-picked crews.
And if you say other than alcohol, drinking, that
type of an abuse, and I believe alcohol is a drug,
that would be the drug abuse question. A lot of them
drank. There weren't a lot, if you're heading for
the question, were there a lot of dopers? The
answer is no.
But remember, we didn't take people with an IQ of 80
either. You know, you wanted 100 plus, 125 that you
could find them. One of the things the
intelligence unit did, they had people who went
through the records from the people processed in
who would call you if somebody came through with a
master's or a PhD, an enlisted man who didn't want
to be an officer. We always had use for another
brain. We didn't get the scum or the riffraff of
America who, instead of going to the TDC for the
Texas example, enlisted for six years. Those kind
were there, I'm sure, but we didn't see them. When I
went to the woods, I was with a unit that was on
operation, and there truly wasn't a drug problem.
Now, as far as morale goes, and asking that
question, you know, well, anti-war, pro-war, you
had all of it. Mm-hmm. uh there were units that i
visited that had
some problems motivating the troops use a nice
army word for get them off their butt lieutenant
and get them going but that wasn't the problem that
we see portrayed later where everybody in the unit
did drugs i didn't see those oh I guess from an
intelligence standpoint, I would think that the
language barrier would have been a problem as far
as operations. The language barrier only becomes
a problem when you're with the Vietnamese
walking through a town trying to talk to people, if
you want to call it civilian street talk. Two
armored units engaged on the field of combat
language barrier is no problem at all. I mean, I'm
shooting at you, you're shooting at me, and one of
us surrenders. Then you encounter the problems.
But the American unit, and say something about
Americans, and I think this is one of the problems
that we had. The great picture of Vietnam was this
mass of battles fought in jungles and other
strange, exotic things like that. Vietnam looked
as much like Texas as anywhere you go. Open
countryside, rolling hills. We had the jungles,
we had the mountains. We had both in I-Corps.
In III Corps you had jungles and some more
mountains, but it was much warmer, more tropical.
The Americans that went, they were isolated.